The Art of Fingering - Part 1  
   
   
 
INTRODUCTION
For convenience, this How-To guide is written using right-handed individuals. If you are left handed, simply use your left when we say right and vise-versa. Both you and your partner must be open to explore each other sexuality. If trust is an issue, the problem in your relationship stems deeper than sex. These problems should try resolving them prior to attempting any of these exercises. Consulting a physician or sex therapist beforehand is recommended.


Fingering - Pleasure by hand
Fingering is the act of pleasing a woman's vaginal region with hands and fingers. Fingering is a form of masturbation using the hands and fingers to stimulate a woman's genitals. In order to be good at pleasing your partner by hand, you must be skilled at gauging her responses. Intensity may vary from female to female. However, we offer some techniques that should get both of your motors off and running. 


Why Fingering?
The hands are the most easily accessible appendage and don't require batteries. The fact is the hand is a complicated part of the body. Think of all the possible activities one performs with his/her hands. Activities such as, playing the guitar, throwing a football, typing on a keyboard and many, many others. Your hands are comprised of knuckles, joints, fingertips and cuticles; all of which vary in texture that can be pleasing...if done properly. What follows is a comprehensive guide for pleasuring your partner with every part of your hands.

 
THE BASICS

Grooming
When attempting such an arduous task as pleasuring your partner by hand, grooming is definitely required. To protect both individuals from cuts and infections, be sure to trim and/or file all fingernails, minimizing all rough edges. Be careful of hangnails, open cuts or infections. If you have existing cuts or bandages on your fingers or hands, allow all wounds to heal before attempting any form masturbation. We cannot stress the importance of hygiene and safe sex for both you and your partner. So before we begin, wash and rinse your hands thoroughly.



Your Mind Set
It is difficult to tell how each area will affect different women. One may have no effect when touched in a particular area, while another may receive an ultra-orgasmic reaction with the same area stimulated. Therefore, aside from what we are about to teach you, it is important that you discuss things with your partner. Not only by asking her what feels good (you can usually tell by the volume and frequency of her moaning), but also by asking her to show you. Watch her masturbate or better yet ask her to guide your hands in all her right places. Be a Boy Scout for a minute and learn some new tricks. Pay very close attention because you may only get this lesson a couple of times.

Don't be too predictable by performing the same routine. Mix it up slightly with pressure and areas of exploration. When confused, remember slowly and gently is always the best policy. Also remember that new partners will require new refreshment courses. Don't use the same techniques with past lovers. In the fear of sounding redundant, not all women are the same.


Her Mind Set/Mind Set/ Setting
The most important aspect of this is her frame of mind. She has to be both comfortable with herself and trusting of you. You will be able to see everything she has down there and you have to let her know you love it. It is imperative that she knows you are enjoying it too. **And that you enjoy seeing her vulva and pleasuring her.

To put her at ease, set a romantic scene. Turn the lights down low. Although it is important to see what you're doing, it is more important that she be in a comfortable state with you looking at her. To create a soothing setting, we suggest a 60-watt bulb lamp and covering it with a scarf or using several scented candles. Don't be overly concerned with it being too dim, you will find that, majority of the investigation will be performed by feeling and petting her genitals. Unplug the phone. Play soft music, such as instrumentals that you can hum too with the sound of sexy saxes playing in the background. An arm length away, should be a couple of glasses of wine or champagne to smooth out the edges.

Pressure
Be aware that your partner's genitals need be handled with delicate finesse. Unlike the durable male penis, it can't be yanked, pulled or slapped without inflicting great pain. Even the slightest movement can produce a strong reaction, good or bad.

"My fiancZe touches my vulva so rough, it often hurts and I have to tell him to stop." - Kelly, 27

"I can achieve orgasms without any sexual touching. Sometime anticipating what my boyfriend is going to do is enough. It's all in the mind." - Kristin, 25


Contrary to popular belief, much of the action occurs on the outer surface of the vagina, where the clitoris is located. Some inexperienced men take the term fingering quite literally and begin by plunging (shoving) their fingers in and out of the vagina like a penis during intercourse. This is the wrong approach.

To better understand a woman you should watch how she pleasures herself. She obviously knows what does and doesn't work for her. Therefore assume the position that will mimic her hand position and access to her vulva.


Waiting for the Special Invitation
Experience lovers will often begin with soft, featherlike caresses that barely touch their partnerOs inner thighs and pubic hairs. They don't go much further until a woman's leg spread open and her pelvis begins to arch upwards. They caress and tease until her vulva invites their fingers inside. The anticipation can be just as intense as the actual act. Remember that a woman's mind is the most sexual organ in her body. Therefore you can begin to describe, 'What you are going to do to her?' 'How you are going to make her feel so good', 'How happy you are that she trusts you' and how much you enjoy what you are doing to her.

Unlike men, women require more time of arousal. Use kissing techniques and gentle massages to heighten her level of arousal. This will relieve the pressure that she has to enjoy it. Letting her know you enjoy it will allow her to relax as well as feel desired. Let her know you are doing it because you want to, not that it is a chore or a responsibility.



 
Lubrication
Lubrication is essential in fingering your partner. Natural secretes differ from woman to woman and are sometimes not enough to make the experience pleasurable. Would you put your car engine through high speeds without oil lubricate? Don't be embarrassed about applying added moisteners. This can range from saliva, K-Y jelly, Astroglide, massage oil or baby oil. You should never use Vaseline (petroleum-base jelly) inside a vagina, because it clogs the vagina of its ability to cleanse itself. It also speeds up the deterioration of latex condoms. Find out what she uses when she masturbates. If she doesn't, your best bet is plain old saliva. It's the cheap, abundant and natural lubricant that is bountiful.

Get a free sample of astorglide at www.astroglide.com


Wrist Motion
Make sure your hand is in a relax position. Don't strain or bend your wrist to reach for crevasses that are almost impossible to reach. Instead, position your body to a more accessible angle. This will prevent less stress on your wrist and provide greater accessibility to her privates.


Focus
When fingering your partner, carefully observe her reactions to each touch. This will allow you to gauge any sensation or discomfort she is experiencing. You may notice her legs begin to tense up and straighten. Maybe she's thrusting towards your hand, which suggests that she would like you to go deeper into her realm. Pay attention to every single detail. You may notice her sensually looking at you finger her. Make her notice how much you enjoy it by looking at her eyes once in awhile and giving her your best bedroom eyes. Relaxing her will allow her to uninhibited. 
"After I orgasms, my legs begin to twitch and shake. It doesn't hurt or
anything, but I think my boyfriend finds it strange." -Debra, 20


Finger Sizes
Like penis sizes, fingers also range in different lengths and thickness'. However in fingering, it is not too important because most of the massaging will occur on the outer surface of the vulva. The index finger can range from 3 to 5 inches. Your fingers can do what your penis can't because it has joints, allowing for exploring her territories. You can explore areas deep within her such as the G-spot as well as intensely focus on the clitoris.

"I have relatively small hands, but you won't hear my wife complaining." - Derrick, 28


Mon Pubis
The decorative fleshy-pad over the female pubic bone which acts as a buffer in face-to-face intercourse and (more important) serves to transmit sensation to the rest of the area when it moves. Many are not aware, if they are oversold on direct clitoris stimulation, that most women can be brought to orgasm simply by holding this gently in the cupped hand and kneading or shaking it, before, without, or as well as putting a finger in the vulva .

You can either grasp it (it exactly fits the palm) or rest the heel of your hand on it while using the fingers on the labia, or you can cup the whole area, mons and closed labia, in your palm and fingers. Practice seeing how much sensation you can produce with your partner lying completely closed.  **Many women find it pleasurable if her mate tugs on it gently.

"I love it when he pulls it over and uses it to rub my clit." Debbie, 23








The Art of Fingering - Part 2  
   
   
 How-To Finger Play

How-to Step by Step
The best way to learn how to finger your lover is to mimic how she masturbates. To do this you can play this little game. Get a blindfold and put it over her eyes. Make sure your hands are warm and place her hands on top of your hands. Now let her glide your hands over her body telling you where to stop and where she wants to be touched. Start touching her and
fingering her. Her moans and words should be guides to what to do and where to go. If you want to move your hands and she wants you to stay in the area, she should force your hands to stay there. If she wants more pressure, she should press down on your hands, if she wants less, then she should ease off on.  If she wants you to go faster, have her tap twice on your fingertips. She is not allowed to talk during this game, just use her fingers and her moans to help you.

Men take note that women usually rest their wrist on their public bone when they masturbate.  This is also the most effective way to get a girl off by fingering her.



Fingering Tips and Testimonials

Rubbing her clitoris indirectly, by pulling or rubbing at the skin around her clitoris, such as her clitoral hood and labia
- Mike, 26

When touching your lover clit be gentle.  Don't treat it like how you would treat your penis.
- Amy, 27

My girlfriend loves it when I Rub her clit through satin sheets.
- Greg, 29

Using a vibrator along with manual stimulation will surely get me off.
- Kerri, 31

If you want to be successful at fingering her you must be able to stimulate all of her erogenous zones.
- Veronica, 33

Use the hood to rub her clitoris. The clitoral hood is the skin the covers and protects the clitoris, and can be used as a delicate fabric to stimulate. Wet the hood. - Chrissy, 26

Slow down after her orgasm. Personally, my clitoris is very sensitive afterwards.
- Mandy, 25


More Tips to Follow
DonOt go for the prize right away. Besides rushing for that G-spot or overly stimulating the clit, try running your fingers along her inner thigh. Try massaging her mon, playfully tugging on her pubic hairs. In addition, try massaging her inner lips with you thumb and index finger. 
Moaning and gasping does not necessarily mean she wants you to press harder or faster. Rather, her clitoris has become sensitive and you should continue to stimulate the areas around the clit.


Rolling the Clit
The clit is sometimes compared to the head of a man's penis, in most cases it is probably more responsive because of the density of nerve endings. They key here is to be gentle because it may be too sensitive for her.

Using your thumb and index finger pads, gently roll her clitoris back and forth. Variations include keeping you index finger stationary and rolling your thumb in a circular motion.



You can also finger your girl by taking her from the head on approach. This is the best way to hit the G-Spot. This method will be explained below.

Here are some pointers when you take this approach.
1. Never try to shove the entire finger in at once.
2. Slowly insert fingers one joint at a time. For instance, slide your finger from the fingernail to the first knuckle into the vagina and move it around in passionate circles.
3. Once she is more aroused, you can stimulate her clitoris more directly.

Hold on, what's the G-Spot again?  Let us explain...

The Great G-Spot

The history of the G-spot
Ah, the infamous female G-Spot. The G-spot is a highly sensitive area found in the front wall of the vagina. It is capable of triggering immense orgasms. You have probably heard the term used frequently when talking about sex. Many doubt its existence, however one cannot doubt that the area in which it is located in is highly sensitive. The G-Spot is named after the German gynecologist, Dr. Ernst Grafenberg, who claimed to have discovered the area. He described a "zone of erogenous feeling" that was "located along the surface of the vaginal wall". The G-spot is a cushiony area found at the front (top, if she is lying down) of the vaginal wall. It is an inch or two from the vaginal opening.

Where can I find it?
To stimulate your partners G-spot, position yourself in the frontal entry position. Now using one or two of your fingers, penetration of the vagina slowly. While licking up onto the clitoris, with your palm down insert one or two fingers (depending on her comfort) into her vagina. Once penetration is made, slowly turn your hand palm up. Now, begin rolling your finger pads along the top surface of the inner vaginal wall, curling your finger(s) back behind her pubic bone and toward the inside of her vaginal opening. This is known as the, "Come-hither here" technique. The depth and pressure should depend on your partner's responses to your touch.


How can I stimulate it?
By using this technique, you should be able to access, or stimulate the G-spot. However, don't feel bad if you can't find it. Even if you do find it, you may find that it is uncomfortable for her. Often at first there is a feeling of a need to urinate. Later, as sexual stimulation becomes more intense, a burning sensation emerges from the area. It has been know make some woman want to urinate, because it is linked to her bladder. Some women find that the initial feeling is uncomfortable, however continued petting will trigger a sensuous response. It takes a lot of practice to find and you'll really need to be able to read your partner well.

Jill, 26, flight attendant, can attest to the power of the G-spot stimulation.
"The orgasm was so overwhelming it left my legs trembling."


Why she needs your help?
Nobody knows how to pleasure yourself through masturbation better than yourself. Only you know what feels good and what doesn't. However females usually pleasure themselves using clitoris stimulation rather than the G-spot. To do this they require long fingers or a sexual aid such as a G-spot dildo.



 Tips For Women

To expand sexual enjoyment, you may choose to masturbate in front of your partner. Many people(particularly men) find it erotic to watch their partners masturbate. By pleasuring yourself, he can learn by seeing the way you handle yourself. Whether you touch yourself delicately, or roughly. When and how often you touch yourself in a particular area.  
Place your hand over his and guide his hands to specific areas that need more attention and detour them from areas that have been overworked.

If you are aroused, show it. Tell him what feels good and what feels even better. Audio clues like, "Mmmm, just like that, baby." Or "Don't stop! I love it like that." "Right there, that's the spot." or even a simple smile. These arousing gestures drive his motivation to please you. Let him know what make you happy! So enjoy!

Try never to give him false compliments, "Oh that was great!" Even though it wasn't. You are entitled to great sex too. If you compliment him on a bad performance he will think there is nothing wrong with his routine and most likely will continue it. Instead, say suggestive open-ended compliments like "I love it when you caress my breasts!" Or "I love it when we did that. Let's do this next time!"


More Reader's Testimonials:
"Chris [my husband] has the magic touch, this is one thing he does really well. I can achieve orgasms instantly with his wonderful hands.  Learning to finger your partner is an art that takes practice." - Sarah, 31

"My advice is to touch her gently.  It's not a video game; don't get too excited and press to hard. " - Tara, 21

"I want to thank you for the 'G-Spot technique'. My darling and I have always had good sex. But this puts a new repertoire into our growing arsenal." -Thomas, 37

"Touch the areas near and around the clitoris, and not directly on it! Sometimes it's just too sensitive." -Cathleen, 20

"Some of the best orgasms I've had have come from my boyfriend fingering me." -Geri, 21

