                   Cable Modem IP Hijacking in Win95/98


The purpose of this is to show you how bad cable modems security is and that
even with a win box you can take someone else's IP. You can hijack IP's using
a cable modem and it's very simple in any operating system. Just follow the
steps:

1) Choose someone's IP that you wish to have. Make sure the IP is on the same
   network. Most cable modem providers use DHCP. The fist thing you have to
   do is find the victims IP. Remember the victims IP has to be in the same
   network and with the same service provider for this to work.

2) Now this is probably the hardest thing in this file (but it's still easy),
   you have to wait until the victims computer is off or you can Smurf kill
   his connection. When you think his computer is off-line just try to ping
   it to see if you get a response. Do this by going to a DOS prompt and
   typing "ping <victims IP>". If you get a response then you have to try
   harder.

   After you get his PC off-line then you go into your network properties and
   edit the IP settings, but instead of having yours there you put the victims
   IP, host, and domain.

3) Restart. If you restart and you get an IP conflict this means that the
   victims computer is on, if you don't get an IP conflict then try to go to
   your web browser and see if it works. With some cable modem providers you
   might have to also add the Gateway, Subnet mask (255.255.55.0), Host, DNS
   search, and Domain.

Now you can go. Everything will work until the victims PC is back on. Once it is
back online it will take the IP away because it will tell you that you have the
wrong Mac addresses.


*Linux*
This is also possible in Linux, but is not the best way. You can change your Mac
address to the victims PC and this is more secure and much easier. There are a
couple of scripts to change your address, just look around.


Warning: Some cable modem service providers will know when you're using the wrong
IP, but hey, it might be useful.


                             Copyright (c) 1999 Wildman

                                 www.hackcanada.com

